               oooooooooooooooooooooooooo
              O                 __       O
              O   \   /  /\    /   |     O
              O    \ /  /  \  /___ |     O
              O     |  /----\ \    |     O
              O     | /      \ \__ |___  O
              O                          O
               oooooooooooooooooooooooooo 


Copyright (C) INRIA 2010. 
Authors: Matthijs Douze & Herve Jegou 
Contact: matthijs.douze@inria.fr  herve.jegou@inria.fr

This software is a computer program whose purpose is to provide 
efficient tools for basic yet computationally demanding tasks, 
such as find k-nearest neighbors using exhaustive search 
and kmeans clustering. 

This software is governed by the CeCILL license under French law and
abiding by the rules of distribution of free software.  You can  use, 
modify and/ or redistribute the software under the terms of the CeCILL
license as circulated by CEA, CNRS and INRIA at the following URL
"http://www.cecill.info", and detailled below in both french and english. 

As a counterpart to the access to the source code and  rights to copy,
modify and redistribute granted by the license, users are provided only
with a limited warranty  and the software's author,  the holder of the
economic rights,  and the successive licensors  have only  limited
liability. 

In this respect, the user's attention is drawn to the risks associated
with loading,  using,  modifying and/or developing or reproducing the
software by the user in light of its specific status of free software,
that may mean  that it is complicated to manipulate,  and  that  also
therefore means  that it is reserved for developers  and  experienced
professionals having in-depth computer knowledge. Users are therefore
encouraged to load and test the software's suitability as regards their
requirements in conditions enabling the security of their systems and/or 
data to be ensured and,  more generally, to use and operate it in the 
same conditions as regards security. 

The fact that you are presently reading this means that you have had
knowledge of the CeCILL license and that you accept its terms.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

CeCILL FREE SOFTWARE LICENSE AGREEMENT


    Notice

This Agreement is a Free Software license agreement that is the result
of discussions between its authors in order to ensure compliance with
the two main principles guiding its drafting:

    * firstly, compliance with the principles governing the distribution
      of Free Software: access to source code, broad rights granted to
      users,
    * secondly, the election of a governing law, French law, with which
      it is conformant, both as regards the law of torts and
      intellectual property law, and the protection that it offers to
      both authors and holders of the economic rights over software.

The authors of the CeCILL (for Ce[a] C[nrs] I[nria] L[ogiciel] L[ibre])
license are: 

Commissariat à l'Energie Atomique - CEA, a public scientific, technical
and industrial research establishment, having its principal place of
business at 25 rue Leblanc, immeuble Le Ponant D, 75015 Paris, France.

Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique - CNRS, a public scientific
and technological establishment, having its principal place of business
at 3 rue Michel-Ange, 75794 Paris cedex 16, France.

Institut National de Recherche en Informatique et en Automatique -
INRIA, a public scientific and technological establishment, having its
principal place of business at Domaine de Voluceau, Rocquencourt, BP
105, 78153 Le Chesnay cedex, France.


    Preamble

The purpose of this Free Software license agreement is to grant users
the right to modify and redistribute the software governed by this
license within the framework of an open source distribution model.

The exercising of these rights is conditional upon certain obligations
for users so as to preserve this status for all subsequent redistributions.

In consideration of access to the source code and the rights to copy,
modify and redistribute granted by the license, users are provided only
with a limited warranty and the software's author, the holder of the
economic rights, and the successive licensors only have limited liability.

In this respect, the risks associated with loading, using, modifying
and/or developing or reproducing the software by the user are brought to
the user's attention, given its Free Software status, which may make it
complicated to use, with the result that its use is reserved for
developers and experienced professionals having in-depth computer
knowledge. Users are therefore encouraged to load and test the
suitability of the software as regards their requirements in conditions
enabling the security of their systems and/or data to be ensured and,
more generally, to use and operate it in the same conditions of
security. This Agreement may be freely reproduced and published,
provided it is not altered, and that no provisions are either added or
removed herefrom.

This Agreement may apply to any or all software for which the holder of
the economic rights decides to submit the use thereof to its provisions.


    Article 1 - DEFINITIONS

For the purpose of this Agreement, when the following expressions
commence with a capital letter, they shall have the following meaning:

Agreement: means this license agreement, and its possible subsequent
versions and annexes.

Software: means the software in its Object Code and/or Source Code form
and, where applicable, its documentation, "as is" when the Licensee
accepts the Agreement.

Initial Software: means the Software in its Source Code and possibly its
Object Code form and, where applicable, its documentation, "as is" when
it is first distributed under the terms and conditions of the Agreement.

Modified Software: means the Software modified by at least one
Contribution.

Source Code: means all the Software's instructions and program lines to
which access is required so as to modify the Software.

Object Code: means the binary files originating from the compilation of
the Source Code.

Holder: means the holder(s) of the economic rights over the Initial
Software.

Licensee: means the Software user(s) having accepted the Agreement.

Contributor: means a Licensee having made at least one Contribution.

Licensor: means the Holder, or any other individual or legal entity, who
distributes the Software under the Agreement.

Contribution: means any or all modifications, corrections, translations,
adaptations and/or new functions integrated into the Software by any or
all Contributors, as well as any or all Internal Modules.

Module: means a set of sources files including their documentation that
enables supplementary functions or services in addition to those offered
by the Software.

External Module: means any or all Modules, not derived from the
Software, so that this Module and the Software run in separate address
spaces, with one calling the other when they are run.

Internal Module: means any or all Module, connected to the Software so
that they both execute in the same address space.

GNU GPL: means the GNU General Public License version 2 or any
subsequent version, as published by the Free Software Foundation Inc.

Parties: mean both the Licensee and the Licensor.

These expressions may be used both in singular and plural form.


    Article 2 - PURPOSE

The purpose of the Agreement is the grant by the Licensor to the
Licensee of a non-exclusive, transferable and worldwide license for the
Software as set forth in Article 5 hereinafter for the whole term of the
protection granted by the rights over said Software. 


    Article 3 - ACCEPTANCE

3.1 The Licensee shall be deemed as having accepted the terms and
conditions of this Agreement upon the occurrence of the first of the
following events:

    * (i) loading the Software by any or all means, notably, by
      downloading from a remote server, or by loading from a physical
      medium;
    * (ii) the first time the Licensee exercises any of the rights
      granted hereunder.

3.2 One copy of the Agreement, containing a notice relating to the
characteristics of the Software, to the limited warranty, and to the
fact that its use is restricted to experienced users has been provided
to the Licensee prior to its acceptance as set forth in Article 3.1
hereinabove, and the Licensee hereby acknowledges that it has read and
understood it.


    Article 4 - EFFECTIVE DATE AND TERM


      4.1 EFFECTIVE DATE

The Agreement shall become effective on the date when it is accepted by
the Licensee as set forth in Article 3.1.


      4.2 TERM

The Agreement shall remain in force for the entire legal term of
protection of the economic rights over the Software.


    Article 5 - SCOPE OF RIGHTS GRANTED

The Licensor hereby grants to the Licensee, who accepts, the following
rights over the Software for any or all use, and for the term of the
Agreement, on the basis of the terms and conditions set forth hereinafter.

Besides, if the Licensor owns or comes to own one or more patents
protecting all or part of the functions of the Software or of its
components, the Licensor undertakes not to enforce the rights granted by
these patents against successive Licensees using, exploiting or
modifying the Software. If these patents are transferred, the Licensor
undertakes to have the transferees subscribe to the obligations set
forth in this paragraph.


      5.1 RIGHT OF USE

The Licensee is authorized to use the Software, without any limitation
as to its fields of application, with it being hereinafter specified
that this comprises:

   1. permanent or temporary reproduction of all or part of the Software
      by any or all means and in any or all form.

   2. loading, displaying, running, or storing the Software on any or
      all medium.

   3. entitlement to observe, study or test its operation so as to
      determine the ideas and principles behind any or all constituent
      elements of said Software. This shall apply when the Licensee
      carries out any or all loading, displaying, running, transmission
      or storage operation as regards the Software, that it is entitled
      to carry out hereunder.


      5.2 ENTITLEMENT TO MAKE CONTRIBUTIONS

The right to make Contributions includes the right to translate, adapt,
arrange, or make any or all modifications to the Software, and the right
to reproduce the resulting software.

The Licensee is authorized to make any or all Contributions to the
Software provided that it includes an explicit notice that it is the
author of said Contribution and indicates the date of the creation thereof.


      5.3 RIGHT OF DISTRIBUTION

In particular, the right of distribution includes the right to publish,
transmit and communicate the Software to the general public on any or
all medium, and by any or all means, and the right to market, either in
consideration of a fee, or free of charge, one or more copies of the
Software by any means.

The Licensee is further authorized to distribute copies of the modified
or unmodified Software to third parties according to the terms and
conditions set forth hereinafter.


        5.3.1 DISTRIBUTION OF SOFTWARE WITHOUT MODIFICATION

The Licensee is authorized to distribute true copies of the Software in
Source Code or Object Code form, provided that said distribution
complies with all the provisions of the Agreement and is accompanied by:

   1. a copy of the Agreement,

   2. a notice relating to the limitation of both the Licensor's
      warranty and liability as set forth in Articles 8 and 9,

and that, in the event that only the Object Code of the Software is
redistributed, the Licensee allows future Licensees unhindered access to
the full Source Code of the Software by indicating how to access it, it
being understood that the additional cost of acquiring the Source Code
shall not exceed the cost of transferring the data.


        5.3.2 DISTRIBUTION OF MODIFIED SOFTWARE

When the Licensee makes a Contribution to the Software, the terms and
conditions for the distribution of the resulting Modified Software
become subject to all the provisions of this Agreement.

The Licensee is authorized to distribute the Modified Software, in
source code or object code form, provided that said distribution
complies with all the provisions of the Agreement and is accompanied by:

   1. a copy of the Agreement,

   2. a notice relating to the limitation of both the Licensor's
      warranty and liability as set forth in Articles 8 and 9,

and that, in the event that only the object code of the Modified
Software is redistributed, the Licensee allows future Licensees
unhindered access to the full source code of the Modified Software by
indicating how to access it, it being understood that the additional
cost of acquiring the source code shall not exceed the cost of
transferring the data.


        5.3.3 DISTRIBUTION OF EXTERNAL MODULES

When the Licensee has developed an External Module, the terms and
conditions of this Agreement do not apply to said External Module, that
may be distributed under a separate license agreement.


        5.3.4 COMPATIBILITY WITH THE GNU GPL

The Licensee can include a code that is subject to the provisions of one
of the versions of the GNU GPL in the Modified or unmodified Software,
and distribute that entire code under the terms of the same version of
the GNU GPL.

The Licensee can include the Modified or unmodified Software in a code
that is subject to the provisions of one of the versions of the GNU GPL,
and distribute that entire code under the terms of the same version of
the GNU GPL.


    Article 6 - INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY


      6.1 OVER THE INITIAL SOFTWARE

The Holder owns the economic rights over the Initial Software. Any or
all use of the Initial Software is subject to compliance with the terms
and conditions under which the Holder has elected to distribute its work
and no one shall be entitled to modify the terms and conditions for the
distribution of said Initial Software.

The Holder undertakes that the Initial Software will remain ruled at
least by this Agreement, for the duration set forth in Article 4.2.


      6.2 OVER THE CONTRIBUTIONS

The Licensee who develops a Contribution is the owner of the
intellectual property rights over this Contribution as defined by
applicable law.


      6.3 OVER THE EXTERNAL MODULES

The Licensee who develops an External Module is the owner of the
intellectual property rights over this External Module as defined by
applicable law and is free to choose the type of agreement that shall
govern its distribution.


      6.4 JOINT PROVISIONS

The Licensee expressly undertakes:

   1. not to remove, or modify, in any manner, the intellectual property
      notices attached to the Software;

   2. to reproduce said notices, in an identical manner, in the copies
      of the Software modified or not.

The Licensee undertakes not to directly or indirectly infringe the
intellectual property rights of the Holder and/or Contributors on the
Software and to take, where applicable, vis-à-vis its staff, any and all
measures required to ensure respect of said intellectual property rights
of the Holder and/or Contributors.


    Article 7 - RELATED SERVICES

7.1 Under no circumstances shall the Agreement oblige the Licensor to
provide technical assistance or maintenance services for the Software.

However, the Licensor is entitled to offer this type of services. The
terms and conditions of such technical assistance, and/or such
maintenance, shall be set forth in a separate instrument. Only the
Licensor offering said maintenance and/or technical assistance services
shall incur liability therefor.

7.2 Similarly, any Licensor is entitled to offer to its licensees, under
its sole responsibility, a warranty, that shall only be binding upon
itself, for the redistribution of the Software and/or the Modified
Software, under terms and conditions that it is free to decide. Said
warranty, and the financial terms and conditions of its application,
shall be subject of a separate instrument executed between the Licensor
and the Licensee.


    Article 8 - LIABILITY

8.1 Subject to the provisions of Article 8.2, the Licensee shall be
entitled to claim compensation for any direct loss it may have suffered
from the Software as a result of a fault on the part of the relevant
Licensor, subject to providing evidence thereof.

8.2 The Licensor's liability is limited to the commitments made under
this Agreement and shall not be incurred as a result of in particular:
(i) loss due the Licensee's total or partial failure to fulfill its
obligations, (ii) direct or consequential loss that is suffered by the
Licensee due to the use or performance of the Software, and (iii) more
generally, any consequential loss. In particular the Parties expressly
agree that any or all pecuniary or business loss (i.e. loss of data,
loss of profits, operating loss, loss of customers or orders,
opportunity cost, any disturbance to business activities) or any or all
legal proceedings instituted against the Licensee by a third party,
shall constitute consequential loss and shall not provide entitlement to
any or all compensation from the Licensor.


    Article 9 - WARRANTY

9.1 The Licensee acknowledges that the scientific and technical
state-of-the-art when the Software was distributed did not enable all
possible uses to be tested and verified, nor for the presence of
possible defects to be detected. In this respect, the Licensee's
attention has been drawn to the risks associated with loading, using,
modifying and/or developing and reproducing the Software which are
reserved for experienced users.

The Licensee shall be responsible for verifying, by any or all means,
the suitability of the product for its requirements, its good working
order, and for ensuring that it shall not cause damage to either persons
or properties.

9.2 The Licensor hereby represents, in good faith, that it is entitled
to grant all the rights over the Software (including in particular the
rights set forth in Article 5).

9.3 The Licensee acknowledges that the Software is supplied "as is" by
the Licensor without any other express or tacit warranty, other than
that provided for in Article 9.2 and, in particular, without any warranty 
as to its commercial value, its secured, safe, innovative or relevant
nature.

Specifically, the Licensor does not warrant that the Software is free
from any error, that it will operate without interruption, that it will
be compatible with the Licensee's own equipment and software
configuration, nor that it will meet the Licensee's requirements.

9.4 The Licensor does not either expressly or tacitly warrant that the
Software does not infringe any third party intellectual property right
relating to a patent, software or any other property right. Therefore,
the Licensor disclaims any and all liability towards the Licensee
arising out of any or all proceedings for infringement that may be
instituted in respect of the use, modification and redistribution of the
Software. Nevertheless, should such proceedings be instituted against
the Licensee, the Licensor shall provide it with technical and legal
assistance for its defense. Such technical and legal assistance shall be
decided on a case-by-case basis between the relevant Licensor and the
Licensee pursuant to a memorandum of understanding. The Licensor
disclaims any and all liability as regards the Licensee's use of the
name of the Software. No warranty is given as regards the existence of
prior rights over the name of the Software or as regards the existence
of a trademark.


    Article 10 - TERMINATION

10.1 In the event of a breach by the Licensee of its obligations
hereunder, the Licensor may automatically terminate this Agreement
thirty (30) days after notice has been sent to the Licensee and has
remained ineffective.

10.2 A Licensee whose Agreement is terminated shall no longer be
authorized to use, modify or distribute the Software. However, any
licenses that it may have granted prior to termination of the Agreement
shall remain valid subject to their having been granted in compliance
with the terms and conditions hereof.


    Article 11 - MISCELLANEOUS


      11.1 EXCUSABLE EVENTS

Neither Party shall be liable for any or all delay, or failure to
perform the Agreement, that may be attributable to an event of force
majeure, an act of God or an outside cause, such as defective
functioning or interruptions of the electricity or telecommunications
networks, network paralysis following a virus attack, intervention by
government authorities, natural disasters, water damage, earthquakes,
fire, explosions, strikes and labor unrest, war, etc.

11.2 Any failure by either Party, on one or more occasions, to invoke
one or more of the provisions hereof, shall under no circumstances be
interpreted as being a waiver by the interested Party of its right to
invoke said provision(s) subsequently.

11.3 The Agreement cancels and replaces any or all previous agreements,
whether written or oral, between the Parties and having the same
purpose, and constitutes the entirety of the agreement between said
Parties concerning said purpose. No supplement or modification to the
terms and conditions hereof shall be effective as between the Parties
unless it is made in writing and signed by their duly authorized
representatives.

11.4 In the event that one or more of the provisions hereof were to
conflict with a current or future applicable act or legislative text,
said act or legislative text shall prevail, and the Parties shall make
the necessary amendments so as to comply with said act or legislative
text. All other provisions shall remain effective. Similarly, invalidity
of a provision of the Agreement, for any reason whatsoever, shall not
cause the Agreement as a whole to be invalid.


      11.5 LANGUAGE

The Agreement is drafted in both French and English and both versions
are deemed authentic.


    Article 12 - NEW VERSIONS OF THE AGREEMENT

12.1 Any person is authorized to duplicate and distribute copies of this
Agreement.

12.2 So as to ensure coherence, the wording of this Agreement is
protected and may only be modified by the authors of the License, who
reserve the right to periodically publish updates or new versions of the
Agreement, each with a separate number. These subsequent versions may
address new issues encountered by Free Software.

12.3 Any Software distributed under a given version of the Agreement may
only be subsequently distributed under the same version of the Agreement
or a subsequent version, subject to the provisions of Article 5.3.4.


    Article 13 - GOVERNING LAW AND JURISDICTION

13.1 The Agreement is governed by French law. The Parties agree to
endeavor to seek an amicable solution to any disagreements or disputes
that may arise during the performance of the Agreement.

13.2 Failing an amicable solution within two (2) months as from their
occurrence, and unless emergency proceedings are necessary, the
disagreements or disputes shall be referred to the Paris Courts having
jurisdiction, by the more diligent Party.


Version 2.0 dated 2006-09-05.


------------------------------------------------------------------------


CONTRAT DE LICENCE DE LOGICIEL LIBRE CeCILL


    Avertissement

Ce contrat est une licence de logiciel libre issue d'une concertation
entre ses auteurs afin que le respect de deux grands principes préside à
sa rédaction:

    * d'une part, le respect des principes de diffusion des logiciels
      libres: accès au code source, droits étendus conférés aux
      utilisateurs,
    * d'autre part, la désignation d'un droit applicable, le droit
      français, auquel elle est conforme, tant au regard du droit de la
      responsabilité civile que du droit de la propriété intellectuelle
      et de la protection qu'il offre aux auteurs et titulaires des
      droits patrimoniaux sur un logiciel.

Les auteurs de la licence CeCILL (pour Ce[a] C[nrs] I[nria] L[ogiciel]
L[ibre]) sont:

Commissariat à l'Energie Atomique - CEA, établissement public de
recherche à caractère scientifique, technique et industriel, dont le
siège est situé 25 rue Leblanc, immeuble Le Ponant D, 75015 Paris.

Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique - CNRS, établissement
public à caractère scientifique et technologique, dont le siège est
situé 3 rue Michel-Ange, 75794 Paris cedex 16.

Institut National de Recherche en Informatique et en Automatique -
INRIA, établissement public à caractère scientifique et technologique,
dont le siège est situé Domaine de Voluceau, Rocquencourt, BP 105, 78153
Le Chesnay cedex.


    Préambule

Ce contrat est une licence de logiciel libre dont l'objectif est de
conférer aux utilisateurs la liberté de modification et de
redistribution du logiciel régi par cette licence dans le cadre d'un
modèle de diffusion en logiciel libre.

L'exercice de ces libertés est assorti de certains devoirs à la charge
des utilisateurs afin de préserver ce statut au cours des
redistributions ultérieures.

L'accessibilité au code source et les droits de copie, de modification
et de redistribution qui en découlent ont pour contrepartie de n'offrir
aux utilisateurs qu'une garantie limitée et de ne faire peser sur
l'auteur du logiciel, le titulaire des droits patrimoniaux et les
concédants successifs qu'une responsabilité restreinte.

A cet égard l'attention de l'utilisateur est attirée sur les risques
associés au chargement, à l'utilisation, à la modification et/ou au
développement et à la reproduction du logiciel par l'utilisateur étant
donné sa spécificité de logiciel libre, qui peut le rendre complexe à
manipuler et qui le réserve donc à des développeurs ou des
professionnels avertis possédant des connaissances informatiques
approfondies. Les utilisateurs sont donc invités à charger et tester
l'adéquation du logiciel à leurs besoins dans des conditions permettant
d'assurer la sécurité de leurs systèmes et/ou de leurs données et, plus
généralement, à l'utiliser et l'exploiter dans les mêmes conditions de
sécurité. Ce contrat peut être reproduit et diffusé librement, sous
réserve de le conserver en l'état, sans ajout ni suppression de clauses.

Ce contrat est susceptible de s'appliquer à tout logiciel dont le
titulaire des droits patrimoniaux décide de soumettre l'exploitation aux
dispositions qu'il contient.


    Article 1 - DEFINITIONS

Dans ce contrat, les termes suivants, lorsqu'ils seront écrits avec une
lettre capitale, auront la signification suivante:

Contrat: désigne le présent contrat de licence, ses éventuelles versions
postérieures et annexes.

Logiciel: désigne le logiciel sous sa forme de Code Objet et/ou de Code
Source et le cas échéant sa documentation, dans leur état au moment de
l'acceptation du Contrat par le Licencié.

Logiciel Initial: désigne le Logiciel sous sa forme de Code Source et
éventuellement de Code Objet et le cas échéant sa documentation, dans
leur état au moment de leur première diffusion sous les termes du Contrat.

Logiciel Modifié: désigne le Logiciel modifié par au moins une
Contribution.

Code Source: désigne l'ensemble des instructions et des lignes de
programme du Logiciel et auquel l'accès est nécessaire en vue de
modifier le Logiciel.

Code Objet: désigne les fichiers binaires issus de la compilation du
Code Source.

Titulaire: désigne le ou les détenteurs des droits patrimoniaux d'auteur
sur le Logiciel Initial.

Licencié: désigne le ou les utilisateurs du Logiciel ayant accepté le
Contrat.

Contributeur: désigne le Licencié auteur d'au moins une Contribution.

Concédant: désigne le Titulaire ou toute personne physique ou morale
distribuant le Logiciel sous le Contrat.

Contribution: désigne l'ensemble des modifications, corrections,
traductions, adaptations et/ou nouvelles fonctionnalités intégrées dans
le Logiciel par tout Contributeur, ainsi que tout Module Interne.

Module: désigne un ensemble de fichiers sources y compris leur
documentation qui permet de réaliser des fonctionnalités ou services
supplémentaires à ceux fournis par le Logiciel.

Module Externe: désigne tout Module, non dérivé du Logiciel, tel que ce
Module et le Logiciel s'exécutent dans des espaces d'adressage
différents, l'un appelant l'autre au moment de leur exécution.

Module Interne: désigne tout Module lié au Logiciel de telle sorte
qu'ils s'exécutent dans le même espace d'adressage.

GNU GPL: désigne la GNU General Public License dans sa version 2 ou
toute version ultérieure, telle que publiée par Free Software Foundation
Inc.

Parties: désigne collectivement le Licencié et le Concédant.

Ces termes s'entendent au singulier comme au pluriel.


    Article 2 - OBJET

Le Contrat a pour objet la concession par le Concédant au Licencié d'une
licence non exclusive, cessible et mondiale du Logiciel telle que
définie ci-après à l'article 5 pour toute la durée de protection des droits
portant sur ce Logiciel.


    Article 3 - ACCEPTATION

3.1 L'acceptation par le Licencié des termes du Contrat est réputée
acquise du fait du premier des faits suivants:

    * (i) le chargement du Logiciel par tout moyen notamment par
      téléchargement à partir d'un serveur distant ou par chargement à
      partir d'un support physique;
    * (ii) le premier exercice par le Licencié de l'un quelconque des
      droits concédés par le Contrat.

3.2 Un exemplaire du Contrat, contenant notamment un avertissement
relatif aux spécificités du Logiciel, à la restriction de garantie et à
la limitation à un usage par des utilisateurs expérimentés a été mis à
disposition du Licencié préalablement à son acceptation telle que
définie à l'article 3.1 ci dessus et le Licencié reconnaît en avoir pris
connaissance.


    Article 4 - ENTREE EN VIGUEUR ET DUREE


      4.1 ENTREE EN VIGUEUR

Le Contrat entre en vigueur à la date de son acceptation par le Licencié
telle que définie en 3.1.


      4.2 DUREE

Le Contrat produira ses effets pendant toute la durée légale de
protection des droits patrimoniaux portant sur le Logiciel.


    Article 5 - ETENDUE DES DROITS CONCEDES

Le Concédant concède au Licencié, qui accepte, les droits suivants sur
le Logiciel pour toutes destinations et pour la durée du Contrat dans
les conditions ci-après détaillées.

Par ailleurs, si le Concédant détient ou venait à détenir un ou
plusieurs brevets d'invention protégeant tout ou partie des
fonctionnalités du Logiciel ou de ses composants, il s'engage à ne pas
opposer les éventuels droits conférés par ces brevets aux Licenciés
successifs qui utiliseraient, exploiteraient ou modifieraient le
Logiciel. En cas de cession de ces brevets, le Concédant s'engage à
faire reprendre les obligations du présent alinéa aux cessionnaires.


      5.1 DROIT D'UTILISATION

Le Licencié est autorisé à utiliser le Logiciel, sans restriction quant
aux domaines d'application, étant ci-après précisé que cela comporte:

   1. la reproduction permanente ou provisoire du Logiciel en tout ou
      partie par tout moyen et sous toute forme.

   2. le chargement, l'affichage, l'exécution, ou le stockage du
      Logiciel sur tout support.

   3. la possibilité d'en observer, d'en étudier, ou d'en tester le
      fonctionnement afin de déterminer les idées et principes qui sont
      à la base de n'importe quel élément de ce Logiciel; et ceci,
      lorsque le Licencié effectue toute opération de chargement,
      d'affichage, d'exécution, de transmission ou de stockage du
      Logiciel qu'il est en droit d'effectuer en vertu du Contrat.


      5.2 DROIT D'APPORTER DES CONTRIBUTIONS

Le droit d'apporter des Contributions comporte le droit de traduire,
d'adapter, d'arranger ou d'apporter toute autre modification au Logiciel
et le droit de reproduire le logiciel en résultant.

Le Licencié est autorisé à apporter toute Contribution au Logiciel sous
réserve de mentionner, de façon explicite, son nom en tant qu'auteur de
cette Contribution et la date de création de celle-ci.


      5.3 DROIT DE DISTRIBUTION

Le droit de distribution comporte notamment le droit de diffuser, de
transmettre et de communiquer le Logiciel au public sur tout support et
par tout moyen ainsi que le droit de mettre sur le marché à titre
onéreux ou gratuit, un ou des exemplaires du Logiciel par tout procédé.

Le Licencié est autorisé à distribuer des copies du Logiciel, modifié ou
non, à des tiers dans les conditions ci-après détaillées.


        5.3.1 DISTRIBUTION DU LOGICIEL SANS MODIFICATION

Le Licencié est autorisé à distribuer des copies conformes du Logiciel,
sous forme de Code Source ou de Code Objet, à condition que cette
distribution respecte les dispositions du Contrat dans leur totalité et
soit accompagnée:

   1. d'un exemplaire du Contrat,

   2. d'un avertissement relatif à la restriction de garantie et de
      responsabilité du Concédant telle que prévue aux articles 8
      et 9,

et que, dans le cas où seul le Code Objet du Logiciel est redistribué,
le Licencié permette aux futurs Licenciés d'accéder facilement au Code
Source complet du Logiciel en indiquant les modalités d'accès, étant
entendu que le coût additionnel d'acquisition du Code Source ne devra
pas excéder le simple coût de transfert des données.


        5.3.2 DISTRIBUTION DU LOGICIEL MODIFIE

Lorsque le Licencié apporte une Contribution au Logiciel, les conditions
de distribution du Logiciel Modifié en résultant sont alors soumises à
l'intégralité des dispositions du Contrat.

Le Licencié est autorisé à distribuer le Logiciel Modifié, sous forme de
code source ou de code objet, à condition que cette distribution
respecte les dispositions du Contrat dans leur totalité et soit
accompagnée:

   1. d'un exemplaire du Contrat,

   2. d'un avertissement relatif à la restriction de garantie et de
      responsabilité du Concédant telle que prévue aux articles 8
      et 9,

et que, dans le cas où seul le code objet du Logiciel Modifié est
redistribué, le Licencié permette aux futurs Licenciés d'accéder
facilement au code source complet du Logiciel Modifié en indiquant les
modalités d'accès, étant entendu que le coût additionnel d'acquisition
du code source ne devra pas excéder le simple coût de transfert des données.


        5.3.3 DISTRIBUTION DES MODULES EXTERNES

Lorsque le Licencié a développé un Module Externe les conditions du
Contrat ne s'appliquent pas à ce Module Externe, qui peut être distribué
sous un contrat de licence différent.


        5.3.4 COMPATIBILITE AVEC LA LICENCE GNU GPL

Le Licencié peut inclure un code soumis aux dispositions d'une des
versions de la licence GNU GPL dans le Logiciel modifié ou non et
distribuer l'ensemble sous les conditions de la même version de la
licence GNU GPL.

Le Licencié peut inclure le Logiciel modifié ou non dans un code soumis
aux dispositions d'une des versions de la licence GNU GPL et distribuer
l'ensemble sous les conditions de la même version de la licence GNU GPL.


    Article 6 - PROPRIETE INTELLECTUELLE


      6.1 SUR LE LOGICIEL INITIAL

Le Titulaire est détenteur des droits patrimoniaux sur le Logiciel
Initial. Toute utilisation du Logiciel Initial est soumise au respect
des conditions dans lesquelles le Titulaire a choisi de diffuser son
oeuvre et nul autre n'a la faculté de modifier les conditions de
diffusion de ce Logiciel Initial.

Le Titulaire s'engage à ce que le Logiciel Initial reste au moins régi
par le Contrat et ce, pour la durée visée à l'article 4.2.


      6.2 SUR LES CONTRIBUTIONS

Le Licencié qui a développé une Contribution est titulaire sur celle-ci
des droits de propriété intellectuelle dans les conditions définies par
la législation applicable.


      6.3 SUR LES MODULES EXTERNES

Le Licencié qui a développé un Module Externe est titulaire sur celui-ci
des droits de propriété intellectuelle dans les conditions définies par
la législation applicable et reste libre du choix du contrat régissant
sa diffusion.


      6.4 DISPOSITIONS COMMUNES

Le Licencié s'engage expressément:

   1. à ne pas supprimer ou modifier de quelque manière que ce soit les
      mentions de propriété intellectuelle apposées sur le Logiciel;

   2. à reproduire à l'identique lesdites mentions de propriété
      intellectuelle sur les copies du Logiciel modifié ou non.

Le Licencié s'engage à ne pas porter atteinte, directement ou
indirectement, aux droits de propriété intellectuelle du Titulaire et/ou
des Contributeurs sur le Logiciel et à prendre, le cas échéant, à
l'égard de son personnel toutes les mesures nécessaires pour assurer le
respect des dits droits de propriété intellectuelle du Titulaire et/ou
des Contributeurs.


    Article 7 - SERVICES ASSOCIES

7.1 Le Contrat n'oblige en aucun cas le Concédant à la réalisation de
prestations d'assistance technique ou de maintenance du Logiciel.

Cependant le Concédant reste libre de proposer ce type de services. Les
termes et conditions d'une telle assistance technique et/ou d'une telle
maintenance seront alors déterminés dans un acte séparé. Ces actes de
maintenance et/ou assistance technique n'engageront que la seule
responsabilité du Concédant qui les propose.

7.2 De même, tout Concédant est libre de proposer, sous sa seule
responsabilité, à ses licenciés une garantie, qui n'engagera que lui,
lors de la redistribution du Logiciel et/ou du Logiciel Modifié et ce,
dans les conditions qu'il souhaite. Cette garantie et les modalités
financières de son application feront l'objet d'un acte séparé entre le
Concédant et le Licencié.


    Article 8 - RESPONSABILITE

8.1 Sous réserve des dispositions de l'article 8.2, le Licencié a la 
faculté, sous réserve de prouver la faute du Concédant concerné, de
solliciter la réparation du préjudice direct qu'il subirait du fait du
Logiciel et dont il apportera la preuve.

8.2 La responsabilité du Concédant est limitée aux engagements pris en
application du Contrat et ne saurait être engagée en raison notamment:
(i) des dommages dus à l'inexécution, totale ou partielle, de ses
obligations par le Licencié, (ii) des dommages directs ou indirects
découlant de l'utilisation ou des performances du Logiciel subis par le
Licencié et (iii) plus généralement d'un quelconque dommage indirect. En
particulier, les Parties conviennent expressément que tout préjudice
financier ou commercial (par exemple perte de données, perte de
bénéfices, perte d'exploitation, perte de clientèle ou de commandes,
manque à gagner, trouble commercial quelconque) ou toute action dirigée
contre le Licencié par un tiers, constitue un dommage indirect et
n'ouvre pas droit à réparation par le Concédant.


    Article 9 - GARANTIE

9.1 Le Licencié reconnaît que l'état actuel des connaissances
scientifiques et techniques au moment de la mise en circulation du
Logiciel ne permet pas d'en tester et d'en vérifier toutes les
utilisations ni de détecter l'existence d'éventuels défauts. L'attention
du Licencié a été attirée sur ce point sur les risques associés au
chargement, à l'utilisation, la modification et/ou au développement et à
la reproduction du Logiciel qui sont réservés à des utilisateurs avertis.

Il relève de la responsabilité du Licencié de contrôler, par tous
moyens, l'adéquation du produit à ses besoins, son bon fonctionnement et
de s'assurer qu'il ne causera pas de dommages aux personnes et aux biens.

9.2 Le Concédant déclare de bonne foi être en droit de concéder
l'ensemble des droits attachés au Logiciel (comprenant notamment les
droits visés à l'article 5).

9.3 Le Licencié reconnaît que le Logiciel est fourni "en l'état" par le
Concédant sans autre garantie, expresse ou tacite, que celle prévue à
l'article 9.2 et notamment sans aucune garantie sur sa valeur commerciale, 
son caractère sécurisé, innovant ou pertinent.

En particulier, le Concédant ne garantit pas que le Logiciel est exempt
d'erreur, qu'il fonctionnera sans interruption, qu'il sera compatible
avec l'équipement du Licencié et sa configuration logicielle ni qu'il
remplira les besoins du Licencié.

9.4 Le Concédant ne garantit pas, de manière expresse ou tacite, que le
Logiciel ne porte pas atteinte à un quelconque droit de propriété
intellectuelle d'un tiers portant sur un brevet, un logiciel ou sur tout
autre droit de propriété. Ainsi, le Concédant exclut toute garantie au
profit du Licencié contre les actions en contrefaçon qui pourraient être
diligentées au titre de l'utilisation, de la modification, et de la
redistribution du Logiciel. Néanmoins, si de telles actions sont
exercées contre le Licencié, le Concédant lui apportera son aide
technique et juridique pour sa défense. Cette aide technique et
juridique est déterminée au cas par cas entre le Concédant concerné et
le Licencié dans le cadre d'un protocole d'accord. Le Concédant dégage
toute responsabilité quant à l'utilisation de la dénomination du
Logiciel par le Licencié. Aucune garantie n'est apportée quant à
l'existence de droits antérieurs sur le nom du Logiciel et sur
l'existence d'une marque.


    Article 10 - RESILIATION

10.1 En cas de manquement par le Licencié aux obligations mises à sa
charge par le Contrat, le Concédant pourra résilier de plein droit le
Contrat trente (30) jours après notification adressée au Licencié et
restée sans effet.

10.2 Le Licencié dont le Contrat est résilié n'est plus autorisé à
utiliser, modifier ou distribuer le Logiciel. Cependant, toutes les
licences qu'il aura concédées antérieurement à la résiliation du Contrat
resteront valides sous réserve qu'elles aient été effectuées en
conformité avec le Contrat.


    Article 11 - DISPOSITIONS DIVERSES


      11.1 CAUSE EXTERIEURE

Aucune des Parties ne sera responsable d'un retard ou d'une défaillance
d'exécution du Contrat qui serait dû à un cas de force majeure, un cas
fortuit ou une cause extérieure, telle que, notamment, le mauvais
fonctionnement ou les interruptions du réseau électrique ou de
télécommunication, la paralysie du réseau liée à une attaque
informatique, l'intervention des autorités gouvernementales, les
catastrophes naturelles, les dégâts des eaux, les tremblements de terre,
le feu, les explosions, les grèves et les conflits sociaux, l'état de
guerre...

11.2 Le fait, par l'une ou l'autre des Parties, d'omettre en une ou
plusieurs occasions de se prévaloir d'une ou plusieurs dispositions du
Contrat, ne pourra en aucun cas impliquer renonciation par la Partie
intéressée à s'en prévaloir ultérieurement.

11.3 Le Contrat annule et remplace toute convention antérieure, écrite
ou orale, entre les Parties sur le même objet et constitue l'accord
entier entre les Parties sur cet objet. Aucune addition ou modification
aux termes du Contrat n'aura d'effet à l'égard des Parties à moins
d'être faite par écrit et signée par leurs représentants dûment habilités.

11.4 Dans l'hypothèse où une ou plusieurs des dispositions du Contrat
s'avèrerait contraire à une loi ou à un texte applicable, existants ou
futurs, cette loi ou ce texte prévaudrait, et les Parties feraient les
amendements nécessaires pour se conformer à cette loi ou à ce texte.
Toutes les autres dispositions resteront en vigueur. De même, la
nullité, pour quelque raison que ce soit, d'une des dispositions du
Contrat ne saurait entraîner la nullité de l'ensemble du Contrat.


      11.5 LANGUE

Le Contrat est rédigé en langue française et en langue anglaise, ces
deux versions faisant également foi.


    Article 12 - NOUVELLES VERSIONS DU CONTRAT

12.1 Toute personne est autorisée à copier et distribuer des copies de
ce Contrat.

12.2 Afin d'en préserver la cohérence, le texte du Contrat est protégé
et ne peut être modifié que par les auteurs de la licence, lesquels se
réservent le droit de publier périodiquement des mises à jour ou de
nouvelles versions du Contrat, qui posséderont chacune un numéro
distinct. Ces versions ultérieures seront susceptibles de prendre en
compte de nouvelles problématiques rencontrées par les logiciels libres.

12.3 Tout Logiciel diffusé sous une version donnée du Contrat ne pourra
faire l'objet d'une diffusion ultérieure que sous la même version du
Contrat ou une version postérieure, sous réserve des dispositions de
l'article 5.3.4.


    Article 13 - LOI APPLICABLE ET COMPETENCE TERRITORIALE

13.1 Le Contrat est régi par la loi française. Les Parties conviennent
de tenter de régler à l'amiable les différends ou litiges qui
viendraient à se produire par suite ou à l'occasion du Contrat.

13.2 A défaut d'accord amiable dans un délai de deux (2) mois à compter
de leur survenance et sauf situation relevant d'une procédure d'urgence,
les différends ou litiges seront portés par la Partie la plus diligente
devant les Tribunaux compétents de Paris.


Version 2.0 du 2006-09-05.
